Add Test suites overview documentation (#456)
mendersoftware/mender-qa: Documentation/test-suites-overview.md

# Mender QA test suites overview

This document gives an overview of all the different tests suites that we have
in Mender

## Introduction: test levels

At mender we have different test suites that follow the Development Lifecycle,
verifying our software at different levels through the different phases of the
Development Lifecycle.

Due to our microservices architecture, we name our test suites in a different
way than standards defined by ISTQB (International Software Testing
Qualifications Board) or other online references. See (ISTQB Foundation Level
Syllabus)[https://www.istqb.org/downloads/syllabi/foundation-level-syllabus.html].

Nevertheless, we follow QA best practices and principles in verifying our

> software product and it's individual components at different levels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software product and its individual components at different levels.
```

## Introduction: programming languages

> With the exception of the GUI and some client addons in C, the core components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Except for the GUI and some client addons in C, the core components
```

of Mender are written in Go.

> The unit level tests are written i the same language as the test under code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unit-level tests are written in the same programming language as the code itself
```

(usually Go), while for every other test suite we use Python programming

> language and Pytest framework.

Author: Good idea, thanks.

## unit tests

Test suite       | unit tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | Component testing
Test object      | The code inside a single repository
Source code      | Repository specific, all `*_test.go` files

> How to run       | `go test $(go list ./...)`

Reviewer 2: I think `go test ./...` suffices, doesn't it?

Author: Yes, you are right. Thanks.

Dependencies     | Some repositories (namely, backend services) require MongoDB server

This is the lowest test level, where the code is closely inspected to exercise

> the code under test in as many circumstances as possible. We collect coverage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it under test in as many circumstances as possible. We collect coverage
```

> statistics that are published in each repository GitHub page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statistics that are published on each repository's GitHub page.
```

## backend acceptance tests

Test suite       | backend acceptance tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | Component integration testing
Test object      | Interfaces of a single repository
Source code      | Repository specific, `tests/` directory
How to run       | See [mendertesting template](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mendertesting/blob/master/.gitlab-ci-check-docker-acceptance.yml) and [integration wrapper](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/extra/travis-testing/run-test-environment) (example below)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose

> These test suites focus on the interactions and interfaces between integrated
> components or, in our microservices architecture, services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These test suites focus on the interactions between integrated
components or, in our microservices architecture, services, and their interfaces.
```

### Running locally

Acceptance tests are run in a separate container within the same network as the

> service under test an other services when required. Each repository has a Docker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
service under test and other services when required. Each repository has a Docker
```

compose file (usually named `docker-compose-acceptance.yml`) describing other

> services, networks, aliases that are required to run the tests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
services, networks, and aliases that are required to run the tests.
```

This separate container for the tests is built independently for all
repositories in
[mender-test-containers](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-test-containers/tree/master/backend-acceptance-testing)
and published to Docker Hub as
`mendersoftware/mender-test-containers:acceptance-testing`.

> To run the test, we use the [run-test-environment wrapper from integration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run the tests, we use the [run-test-environment wrapper from integration
```
? Unsure about this one

Author: Yes, it should be "tests" or "test suite".

> To run the test, we use the [run-test-environment wrapper from integration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run the test, we use the [run-test-environment wrapper from the integration
```

repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/extra/travis-testing/run-test-environment).

> An example to run backend acceptance tests for `deviceauth` service follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of running backend acceptance tests for `deviceauth` service follows
```

```
# Build the tester
docker build -f Dockerfile.acceptance-testing -t mendersoftware/deviceauth:prtest .
# Get wrapper
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration.git mender-integration
cp mender-integration/extra/travis-testing/* tests/
# Copy swagger specs
cp docs/* tests/
# Build and copy the binary
go build
cp deviceauth /tests
# Get and copy mender-artifact
wget https://downloads.mender.io/mender-artifact/master/linux/mender-artifact
chmod +x mender-artifact
cp mender-artifact tests/

> # Run tests!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Run the tests!
```

> TESTS_DIR=$(pwd)/tests $(pwd)/tests/run-test-environment acceptance $(pwd)/mender-integration $(pwd)/tests/docker-compose-acceptance.yml

Reviewer 3: Beautiful!

```

## client acceptance tests

Test suite       | client acceptance tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | Component integration testing for meta-mender
Test object      | meta-mender Yocto layer(s) build options
Source code      | [meta-mender](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/tree/master/tests/acceptance) and [mender-image-tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-image-tests/tree/master/tests) repositories
How to run       | `python3 -m pytest` (see below)
Dependencies     | Yocto environment (sourced) with `meta-mender-ci` layer, Python 3, several [Python packages](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/blob/master/tests/acceptance/requirements_py3.txt)

> This test suite verifies different configuration options, image features and build scenarios for Mender's meta-mender Yocto layer(s). The available tests are repeated for a variety of configurations (see below) and the tests include both static checks and runtime checks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This test suite verifies different configuration options, image features and build scenarios for Mender's meta-mender Yocto layer(s). The available tests are repeated for a variety of configurations (see below) and the tests include both static, and runtime checks.
```

Author: Without a coma, right?
```suggestion
This test suite verifies different configuration options, image features and build scenarios for Mender's meta-mender Yocto layer(s). The available tests are repeated for a variety of configurations (see below) and the tests include both static and runtime checks.
```

Reviewer 3: Yes :) Sry

> The platforms under test can be found in [meta-mender

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of tested platforms can be found in [meta-mender
```

repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/tree/master/tests/build-conf).
A "platform", in this context is a combination of CPU architecture (x86, ARM),
boot loader integration (UEFI Grub, u-boot, bios) and a file system (ext4,

> ubifs). Follows a list of the current platforms under test.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ubifs). Following is a list of the current platforms under test:
```

* qemux86-64-uefi-grub
* vexpress-qemu
* vexpress-qemu-flash
* raspberrypi3
* raspberrypi4
* beagleboneblack
* qemux86-64-bios-grub-gpt
* qemux86-64-bios-grub
* vexpress-qemu-uboot-uefi-grub  

### Running locally

To execute the tests, a full Yocto environment (and at least one previously

> build image) is required. A complete recipe of now we build and test this on CI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
build image) is required. A complete recipe of how we build and test this on CI
```

> build image) is required. A complete recipe of now we build and test this on CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built image) is required. A complete recipe of now we build and test this on CI
```

maybe?

> To execute the tests, a full Yocto environment (and at least one previously
> build image) is required. A complete recipe of now we build and test this on CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full Yocto environment (and at least one previously build image) is required
to execute the tests. A complete recipe of how we build and test this on CI
```

can be found at [mender-qa
repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-qa/blob/master/scripts/yocto-build-and-test.sh).

> The following recipe gives an example to biuld and test `qemux86-64-uefi-grub` platform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following recipe gives an example to build and test `qemux86-64-uefi-grub` platform.
```

> The following recipe gives an example to biuld and test `qemux86-64-uefi-grub` platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following recipe gives an example of how to build and test the `qemux86-64-uefi-grub` platform.
```

```
source oe-init-build-env build-qemux86-64-uefi-grub

> bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-core

Reviewer 3: Suggestion:
Maybe comment it up, like you did for the backend tests? Describing each step. That was nice I think

Author: Ok, I added:

```
```
# Initialize a new Yocto build environment
source oe-init-build-env build-qemux86-64-uefi-grub
# Add meta-mender build layers
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-core
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-demo
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-qemu
# Add meta-mender test layer
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/tests/meta-mender-ci
# Take the default Yocto configuration for this platform
cp ../meta-mender/tests/build-conf/qemux86-64-uefi-grub/local.conf conf/
# Set MENDER_ARTIFACT_NAME
cat >> conf/local.conf <<EOF
MENDER_ARTIFACT_NAME = "mender-image-local"
EOF
# Build full image
bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
# Run the tests!
cd ../meta-mender/tests/acceptance/
python3 -m pytest -p no:xdist --bitbake-image core-image-full-cmdline --board
```

Reviewer 3: Yes, exactly!

bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-demo
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/meta-mender-qemu
bitbake-layers add-layer ../meta-mender/tests/meta-mender-ci
cp ../meta-mender/tests/build-conf/qemux86-64-uefi-grub/local.conf conf/
cat >> conf/local.conf <<EOF
MENDER_ARTIFACT_NAME = "mender-image-local"
EOF
bitbake core-image-full-cmdline
cd ../meta-mender/tests/acceptance/
python3 -m pytest -p no:xdist --bitbake-image core-image-full-cmdline --board-type=qemux86-64
```

> ## backend-tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Backend-tests
```

> ## backend-tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Backend tests
```

Test suite       | backend integration tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | System integration testing and server-only Acceptance testing
Test object      | The Mender backend server, as a whole
Source code      | [integration/backend-tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/backend-tests)
How to run       | [`./run`](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/backend-tests/run)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose

> This test suite verifies the interfaces and behavior of an stand alone Mender

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This test suite verifies the interfaces and behavior of a stand alone Mender
```

> This test suite verifies the interfaces and behavior of an stand alone Mender

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test suite verifies the interfaces and behavior of a stand-alone Mender
```

server installation as a whole. A real client is not used, and instead API calls

> to the different endpoints serve as clients our users of the Mender server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to the different endpoints serve as our clients users of the Mender server.
```

> to the different endpoints serve as clients our users of the Mender server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the different endpoints simulates Mender clients connecting to the Mender server.
```

Refer to the
[README](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/backend-tests)
for more details of this test suite.

> ## integration tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Integration tests
```

Test suite       | integration tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | System testing and Acceptance testing
Test object      | The Mender product, as a whole
Source code      | [integration/tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/tests)
How to run       | [`./run.sh`](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/tests/run.sh)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose, Python 3, [Python packages](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/tests/requirements/python-requirements.txt).

> This is the hightest level of testing that we have. The integration test suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the highest level of testing we have. The integration test suite
```

verifies Mender as a product, including both the server and the client.
Different scenarios and configurations are taken into consideration covering

> both functional and non functional testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
both functional and non-functional testing.
```

Refer to the
[README](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/tests) for
more details of this test suite.

## mender-convert acceptance tests

Test suite       | mender-convert acceptance tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | Acceptance testing
Test object      | mender-convert tool, independently
Source code      | [mender-image-tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-image-tests/tree/master/tests) repository and [run-tests.sh](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-convert/blob/master/scripts/test/run-tests.sh) wrapper.
How to run       | [`./scripts/test/run-tests.sh`](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-convert/blob/master/scripts/test/run-tests.sh)
Dependencies     | OS image converted with `mender-convert`

We consider `mender-convert` tool independent of the Mender core product. This

> test suite runs a set of tests to verify the contents and correctness of device
> images produced by the tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test suite runs a set of tests to verify the contents and correctness of the
device images produced by the tool.
```

### Running locally

TODO

> ## other minor acceptance test suites

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Other minor acceptance test suites
```

### mender-docs

Yes, we also test our docs! On selected docs pages, the user instructions are

> verified run as an script and their output and behavior is verified. See the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
verified run as a script and their output and behavior is verified. See the
```

> Yes, we also test our docs! On selected docs pages, the user instructions are
> verified run as an script and their output and behavior is verified. See the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, we also test our docs! On selected docs pages, we verify that the user
instructions can run as a script and their output and behavior are congruent. See the
```

# Mender QA test suites overview

This document gives an overview of all the different tests suites that we have
in Mender

## Introduction: test levels

At Mender we have different test suites that follow the Development Lifecycle,
verifying our software at different levels through the different phases of the
Development Lifecycle.

Due to our microservices architecture, we name our test suites in a different
way than standards defined by ISTQB (International Software Testing

> Qualifications Board) or other online references. See (ISTQB Foundation Level
> Syllabus)[https://www.istqb.org/downloads/syllabi/foundation-level-syllabus.html].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Qualifications Board) or other online references. See [ISTQB Foundation Level
Syllabus](https://www.istqb.org/downloads/syllabi/foundation-level-syllabus.html).
```

Nevertheless, we follow QA best practices and principles in verifying our
software product and its individual components at different levels.

## Introduction: programming languages

Except for the GUI and some client addons in C, the core components of Mender
are written in Go.

The unit-level tests are written in the same programming language as the code

> itself (usually Go), while for every other test suite we use the Python

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
itself (usually Go) and the GUI code is tested using [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) and [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io), while for every other test suite we use the Python
```

Author: @mzedel but is this for unit tests or for e2e tests?

Reviewer 4: Jest is for unit tests, Cypress for e2e tests

Test object      | Interfaces of a single repository
Source code      | Repository specific, `tests/` directory
How to run       | See [mendertesting template](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mendertesting/blob/master/.gitlab-ci-check-docker-acceptance.yml) and [integration wrapper](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/extra/travis-testing/run-test-environment) (example below)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose

These test suites focus on the interactions between integrated components or, in
our microservices architecture, services, and their interfaces.

### Running locally

Acceptance tests are run in a separate container within the same network as the
service under test and other services when required. Each repository has a
Docker compose file (usually named `docker-compose-acceptance.yml`) describing
other services, networks, and aliases that are required to run the tests.

This separate container for the tests is built independently for all
repositories in
[mender-test-containers](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-test-containers/tree/master/backend-acceptance-testing)
and published to Docker Hub as

> `mendersoftware/mender-test-containers:acceptance-testing`.

Reviewer 4: unfortunately this is still only aspirational as of today...

Author: Well, this is the only way to run acceptance tests for, for example, `deviceauth`.

I didn't want to document the two procedures and then explain which repo uses which, do you think we should?

Reviewer 4: no... that was just a reminder that we're unfortunately not there yet - I was very much hoping to get to the migration of some more repos this sprint... but tests

## client acceptance tests

Test suite       | client acceptance tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | Component integration testing for meta-mender
Test object      | meta-mender Yocto layer(s) build options
Source code      | [meta-mender](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/tree/master/tests/acceptance) and [mender-image-tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-image-tests/tree/master/tests) repositories
How to run       | `python3 -m pytest` (see below)
Dependencies     | Yocto environment (sourced) with `meta-mender-ci` layer, Python 3, several [Python packages](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/blob/master/tests/acceptance/requirements_py3.txt)

This test suite verifies different configuration options, image features and
build scenarios for Mender's meta-mender Yocto layer(s). The available tests are
repeated for a variety of configurations (see below) and the tests include both
static and runtime checks.

The list of tested platforms can be found in [meta-mender
repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/meta-mender/tree/master/tests/build-conf).
A "platform", in this context is a combination of CPU architecture (x86, ARM),

> boot loader integration (UEFI Grub, u-boot, bios) and a file system (ext4,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
bootloader integration (UEFI Grub, u-boot, bios) and a file system (ext4,
```

# Run the tests!
cd ../meta-mender/tests/acceptance/
python3 -m pytest -p no:xdist --bitbake-image core-image-full-cmdline --board-type=qemux86-64
```

## Backend tests

Test suite       | backend integration tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | System integration testing and server-only Acceptance testing
Test object      | The Mender backend server, as a whole
Source code      | [integration/backend-tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/backend-tests)
How to run       | [`./run`](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/backend-tests/run)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose

This test suite verifies the interfaces and behavior of a stand-alone Mender
server installation as a whole. A real client is not used, and instead API calls
to the different endpoints simulates Mender clients connecting to the Mender
server.

Refer to the
[README](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/backend-tests)
for more details of this test suite.

## Integration tests

Test suite       | integration tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | System testing and Acceptance testing

> Test object      | The Mender product, as a whole

Reviewer 4: this does not include any UI testing at all...

Author: Right, good point I'll rephrase this.

Source code      | [integration/tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/tests)
How to run       | [`./run.sh`](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/tests/run.sh)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose, Python 3, [Python packages](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/blob/master/tests/requirements/python-requirements.txt).

This is the highest level of testing we have. The integration test suite
verifies Mender as a product, including both the server and the client.
Different scenarios and configurations are taken into consideration covering
both functional and non-functional testing.

Refer to the
[README](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/tests) for
more details of this test suite.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## E2E tests

Test suite       | e2e tests
---------------- | ----------
ISTQB equivalent | System testing and Acceptance testing
Test object      | The Mender product, as a whole
Source code      | [gui/tests/e2e_tests](https://github.com/mendersoftware/gui/tree/master/tests/e2e_tests)
How to run       | [see e2e-test stage](https://github.com/mendersoftware/gui/blob/master/.gitlab-ci.yml)
Dependencies     | Docker, docker-compose, [mender-demo-artifact](https://dgsbl4vditpls.cloudfront.net/mender-demo-artifact.mender).

This is the highest level of testing we have. The integration test suite
verifies Mender as a product, including both the server and a client.
Different scenarios and configurations are taken into consideration covering
both functional and non-functional testing. This also takes the Mender SaaS
offering into account with appropriate tests run depending on the environment.

Refer to the
[README](https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration/tree/master/tests) for
more details of this test suite.

### Running locally

The e2e tests are run in a separate container within the same network as the
service under test and other services when required. The GUI repository has a
Docker compose file (usually named `docker-compose-acceptance.yml`) describing
other services, networks, and aliases that are required to run the tests.

An example of running the OS tests from the `GUI` follows:

´´´
docker build -t mendersoftware/gui:pr .
wget -qP tests/e2e_tests/cypress/fixtures "https://dgsbl4vditpls.cloudfront.net/mender-demo-artifact.mender"
git clone --single-branch https://github.com/mendersoftware/integration.git
GUI_REPOSITORY=$(pwd) INTEGRATION_PATH=$(pwd)/integration ./tests/e2e_tests/run
´´´
```

Author: :clap: Thanks!

Author: I modified a bit the integration tests text, and this one I wrote:

```
The End to End tests (E2E) verify also Mender as a product, including the GUI.
The client interactions are simulated with scripts, while the backend
interactions are carried on through the GUI, the same way a human would do it
when using the product.
```
